docs: What's New & Upgrade Guide 9.5 (#64168)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/whatsnew/whats-new-in-v9-5.md

In subsequent releases, we’ll be refining and enhancing the user interface for managing dashboards and folders, to provide a more streamlined user experience.

## Dashboards and visualizations

### Redesigned empty dashboard state

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana using the emptyDashboardPage [feature toggle]({{< relref "../setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#feature_toggles" >}}). The default value is `true` and you can disable it in config._

Dashboards have been updated so that it’s easier to begin building from an empty dashboard state. The options displayed when you add a new dashboard—adding a visualization, a row, or importing panels—each include brief explanations of what those steps will do, so you can begin building with confidence.

Also, a text **Add** dropdown with these options has replaced the previous icon at the top of the dashboard. This makes it clearer that this element allows you to not just add new panels, but to take all the actions associated with building a new dashboard.

> {{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-empty-dashboard-whats-new-9-5.png" max-width="750px" caption="Dashboard without any visualizations added" >}}

Author: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-empty-dashboard-whats-new-9-5.png" max-width="750px" caption="Dashboard without any visualizations added" >}}

### Dashboard panel redesign

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._

Dashboard panels contain a lot of information, some of which is difficult to discover or access from the dashboard. With our redesigned panels, we've improved accessibility and made it easier to understand the status of a panel by adding and moving key elements.

We’ve improved the support of panels without a header, made a distinction between details set by you and data-induced information, and then included all essential components in the header of the panel. All of these are laid out from left to right in a row, so there are no overlapping, unusable components.

Grafana’s new panel is available only for React-based panels; no Angular-based panels are redesigned. For example, Angular-based panel will still have the old Graph and Table visualizations.
```

---
description: Feature and improvement highlights for Grafana v9.5
keywords:
  - grafana
  - new
  - documentation
  - '9.5'
  - release notes
title: What's new in Grafana v9.5
weight: -33
---

# What’s new in Grafana v9.5

Welcome to Grafana 9.5! Read on to learn about changes to search and navigation, dashboards and visualizations, and authentication and security. For even more detail about all the changes in this release, refer to the [changelog](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

<!-- Template below

## Feature
[Generally available | Available in experimental/beta] in Grafana [Open Source, Enterprise, Cloud Free, Cloud Pro, Cloud Advanced]

Description. Include an overview of the feature and problem it solves, and where to learn more (like a link to the docs).

> **Note:** You must use relative references when linking to docs within the Grafana repo. Please do not use absolute URLs. For more information about relrefs, refer to [Links and references](/docs/writers-toolkit/writing-guide/references/).-->

> ## Nav navigation

Author: ```suggestion
## New navigation
```

### Improved Notification Policies view

- Updates to the notification policies view make it easier to use and manage:
- View default policy and nested policies at a glance
- New tab for mute timings
- View alert instances for each policy
- View contact points and which integrations are configured for each policy
- View inherited properties on nested policies
- Search for label matchers and for contact points to see which notifications are going where

{{< figure src="/media/docs/alerting/notification-policies-view.png" max-width="750px" caption="Improved Notification Policies view" >}}

### Guidance for configuring your Alertmanager

Get additional help while configuring your Alertmanager. If you enter an invalid Alertmanager configuration, an error message displays, and you can choose from a previous working configuration to restart it.

> ## InfluxDB provisioning change
> 
> ### Database field deprecation

Author: @itsmylife - we want to avoid having two headings in a row. Can we simplify this like so:
```suggestion
## InfluxDB database field deprecation
```

---
description: Feature and improvement highlights for Grafana v9.5
keywords:
  - grafana
  - new
  - documentation
  - '9.5'
  - release notes
title: What's new in Grafana v9.5
weight: -33
---

# What’s new in Grafana v9.5

Welcome to Grafana 9.5! We're excited to share some major updates to Grafana's navigation, tons of usability improvements to Alerting, and some promising experiments to help you query your Prometheus metrics. Also, read on to learn about our continued migration from API keys to service accounts, as well as deprecation of plugins that use Angular and a field in the InfluxDB data source.

> For more detail about all the changes in this release, refer to the [changelog](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md). For the specific steps we recommend when you upgrade to v9.5, check out our [Upgrade Guide]({{< relref "../../upgrade-guide/upgrade-v9.5/" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more detail about all the changes in this release, refer to the [changelog](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md). For the specific steps we recommend when you upgrade to v9.5, check out our [Upgrade Guide]({{< relref "../../upgrade-guide/upgrade-v9.5/index.md" >}}).
```

---
description: Feature and improvement highlights for Grafana v9.5
keywords:
  - grafana
  - new
  - documentation
  - '9.5'
  - release notes
title: What's new in Grafana v9.5
weight: -33
---

# What’s new in Grafana v9.5

Welcome to Grafana 9.5! We're excited to share some major updates to Grafana's navigation, tons of usability improvements to Alerting, and some promising experiments to help you query your Prometheus metrics. Also, read on to learn about our continued migration from API keys to service accounts, as well as deprecation of plugins that use Angular and a field in the InfluxDB data source.

> For more detail about all the changes in this release, refer to the [changelog](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md). For the specific steps we recommend when you upgrade to v9.5, check out our [Upgrade Guide]({{< relref "../../upgrade-guide/upgrade-v9.5/" >}}).

Author: @chri2547 - I can't get this link to the upgrade guide to work in my local. I'm not sure what I'm doing wrong here.

Reviewer: Hm, tried a couple things, same result. @jdbaldry , what are we doing wrong here? Thank you!

Reviewer: Fixed.

<!-- Template below

## Feature
[Generally available | Available in experimental/beta] in Grafana [Open Source, Enterprise, Cloud Free, Cloud Pro, Cloud Advanced]

Description. Include an overview of the feature and problem it solves, and where to learn more (like a link to the docs).

> **Note:** You must use relative references when linking to docs within the Grafana repo. Please do not use absolute URLs. For more information about relrefs, refer to [Links and references](/docs/writers-toolkit/writing-guide/references/).-->

> ## Grafana's new navigation is GA

Author: @chri2547 - What do we think about this heading? It feels awkward to me. I've made a suggestion below.
Whatever we decide here, I'll be applying to line 59 since that was also a GA.
```suggestion
## Grafana's new navigation is generally available
```

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._

The navigation in Grafana has been updated with a new design and an improved structure to make it easier for you to access the data you need. With this update, you can quickly navigate between pages, giving you full visibility into the health of your systems.

> As Grafana evolved from a visualization platform to a comprehensive observability solution, we added numerous tools to support users throughout the software development life cycle. These tools focus on preventing incidents, monitoring applications or infrastructure, and aiding in incident response. However, the added functionality needs to be easily discoverable and navigable for it to be truly helpful.
> 
> These are the key updates to Grafana’s navigation experience:

Author: @zsofiakm - Does this edit work?

```suggestion
As Grafana evolved from a visualization platform to a comprehensive observability solution, we added numerous tools to support users throughout the software development life cycle. These tools focus on preventing incidents, monitoring applications or infrastructure, and aiding in incident response. However, the added functionality needs to be easily discoverable and navigable for it to be truly helpful. These key updates to Grafana’s navigation experience help address this:
```

{{< figure src="/static/img/docs/troubleshooting/support-bundle.png" max-width="750px" caption="Create a support bundle to resolve issues faster" >}}

## Alerting

_All Alerting improvements are generally available in all editions of Grafana._

### Search for alert rules from multiple data sources

Search for and display alert rules for multiple data sources at the same time.

### Fuzzy search on the Alert rule list view

Search for namespaces or folders, evaluation groups, and alert rule names on the Alert rules list view with immediate results, and regardless of typos.

### Access an alert rule from a dashboard or a panel

Navigate to an alert rule directly from a dashboard or a panel to easily access the alert rule details.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/alerting/alert-rule-dashboard.png" max-width="750px" caption="Access an alert rule from a dashboard or a panel" >}}

### Access a dashboard or panel from an alert rule

Navigate from an alert rule straight to a dashboard or a panel associated with the alert rule to visualize your alerting data.

> {{< figure src="/media/docs/alerting/dashboard-alert-rule.png" max-width="750px" caption="Access a dashboard or panel from an alert rule" >}}

Author: @brendamuir - Is it possible to get this screenshot in dark mode to be consistent with all the other ones in the What's New?

Reviewer 2: hi there-i've asked for it. most people are off today-hope to have it by tomorrow!

Reviewer 2: Added!

Author: thank you!

### Improved Notification policies view

Updates to the Notification policies view make it easier to use and manage in the following ways:

- View default policy and nested policies at a glance
- New tab for mute timings
- View alert instances for each policy
- View contact points and which integrations are configured for each policy
- View inherited properties on nested policies
- Search for label matchers and for contact points to see which notifications are going where

{{< figure src="/media/docs/alerting/notification-policies-view.png" max-width="750px" caption="Improved Notification policies view" >}}

### Guidance for configuring your Alertmanager

Get additional help while configuring your Alertmanager. If you enter an invalid Alertmanager configuration, an error message displays, and you can choose from a previous working configuration to restart it.

## InfluxDB plugin database field deprecation

The `database` field in the provisioning file has been deprecated.

> This information will be stored in `jsonData` with `dbName` field.

Author: @itsmylife - Can we make this edit?

```suggestion
This information will be stored in the `jsonData` file using the `dbName` field.
```

Reviewer 3: I will make that change like the following: 
```
This information will be stored in the `jsonData` field using the `dbName` property.
```

Reviewer 3: Fixed here https://github.com/grafana/grafana/pull/64168/commits/9c6a4df961be5a6cac84009baf836e13a1b65b95

The `database` field will be removed in the future to make InfluxDB consistent with other data sources.
For more information and examples please refer to the [InfluxDB Provisioning docs]({{< relref "../datasources/influxdb/#provision-the-data-source" >}}).

## Auth: Lock organization roles synced from auth providers

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._

> Grafana v9.4 provided the ability to configure synchronization of organization roles for each OAuth provider. With synchronization on, the organization role was applied to the user from the OAuth provider upon signing in. After signing in, during the session, you could change the user’s organization role.

Author: @danielkenlee - Does this edit work? Want to make this clearer.

```suggestion
Grafana v9.4 provided the ability to configure synchronization of organization roles for each OAuth provider. With synchronization on, the organization role was applied to the user from the OAuth provider upon signing in. However, after the user signed in, you could still change the user’s organization role during the session.
```

Reviewer 4: Much clearer, thanks Isabel!

- A new header that appears on all pages in Grafana, which includes a search function.

Join the [discussion on GitHub](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/discussions/58910) and share your feedback.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/navigation-9-4.png" max-width="750px" caption="Grafana new navigation" >}}

## Dashboards and visualizations

### Redesigned empty dashboard state

_Generally available in all editions of Grafana._

Dashboards have been updated so that it’s easier to begin building from scratch. The options displayed when you add a new dashboard—adding a visualization, a row, or importing panels—each include brief explanations of what those steps will do, so you can begin building with confidence.

Also, a text **Add** dropdown with these options has replaced the previous "+" icon at the top of the dashboard. This makes it clearer that this element allows you not only to add new panels, but to take all the actions associated with building a new dashboard.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-empty-dashboard-whats-new-9-5.png" max-width="750px" caption="Dashboard without any visualizations added" >}}

> ### Dashboard panel redesign

Author: ```suggestion
### Redesigned dashboard panel is generally available
```

This feature should be used if you want to enforce strict role synchronization from your auth provider to the organization roles.

To use this feature, enable the `onlyExternalOrgRoleSync` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support. We'll also be automatically enabling this feature for Grafana Cloud instances over the upcoming weeks.

You can also _prevent_ the synchronization of organization roles from a given authentication provider. For more information, refer to our [skip org role sync]({{< relref "../setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#authgrafana_com-skip_org_role_sync/" >}}) documentation.

### Reporting UI adapted to match the new navigation style

_Generally available in Enterprise edition of Grafana._

We updated the reporting UI to fit better the new navigation style, adding a horizontal slider and moving the Preview and Send buttons to the Action section in the page. We also fixed the alignment of the different sections. 

> {{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/Screenshot-newUI-report.png" max-width="750px" caption="Grafana new report UI >}}

Author: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/Screenshot-newUI-report.png" max-width="750px" caption="Grafana new report UI" >}}
```

When you have thousands (or millions) of Prometheus metrics, it can be hard to find the exact one you're looking for. Enable feature toggle `prometheusMetricEncyclopedia` to replace the basic metric select dropdown in the Prometheus query builder with a paginated and searchable metric _encyclopedia_.

Here's what you can do with the metric encyclopedia:

- Fuzzy search for metrics by name, type, and description
- Filter metrics by Prometheus types (gauge, counter, histogram, summary)
- Display metrics in a paginated list, sort the results, and choose a number of results per page, so that you don't wait a long time for search results
- View metric details, like type and description
- [Expert feature] Search metric names by regex using the backend only

### Prometheus browser cache

_Experimental in all editions of Grafana._

New feature toggle `prometheusResourceBrowserCache` provides the ability to cache Prometheus editor API calls in the Prometheus data source configuration.
This improves Prometheus query editor performance, with the biggest performance improvements seen by users with high cardinality Prometheus instances.

## Removal of API key creation from the UI

> With this update we are going one step further in deprecating API Keys in favor of [service accounts]({{< relref "../administration/service-accounts/" >}}). We've removed the button for creating new API keys through Grafana's user interface, and now only allow the creation of API keys using our HTTP API. We recommend that you migrate your existing API keys to service accounts, and opt for new service accounts instead of new API keys. This change is part of our long-term strategy for sunsetting API keys.

Author: ```suggestion
With this update we are going one step further in deprecating API keys in favor of [service accounts]({{< relref "../administration/service-accounts/" >}}). We've removed the button for creating new API keys through Grafana's user interface, and now only allow the creation of API keys using our HTTP API. We recommend that you migrate your existing API keys to service accounts, and opt for new service accounts instead of new API keys. This change is part of our long-term strategy for sunsetting API keys.
```

This feature should be used if you want to enforce strict role synchronization from your auth provider to the organization roles.

To use this feature, enable the `onlyExternalOrgRoleSync` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support. We'll also be automatically enabling this feature for Grafana Cloud instances over the upcoming weeks.

You can also _prevent_ the synchronization of organization roles from a given authentication provider. Learn more in our [skip org role sync]({{< relref "../setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#authgrafana_com-skip_org_role_sync/" >}}) documentation.

## Reporting UI adapted to match the new navigation style

_Generally available in Grafana Enterprise, Cloud Pro, and Cloud Advanced._

We updated the reporting UI to better fit the new navigation style, adding a horizontal slider and moving the **Preview** and **Send** buttons to the Action section in the page. We also fixed the alignment of the different sections.

> {{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/Screenshot-newUI-report.png" max-width="750px" caption="Grafana new report UI" >}}

Author: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/Screenshot-newUI-report.png" max-width="750px" caption="New Grafana report UI" >}}
```

> ## Experimental support to use JWTs as auth method

Author: ```suggestion
## Support for using JWTs as auth method
```

> ### Experimental support to use JWTs as auth method

Author: ```suggestion
## Experimental support to use JWTs as auth method
```

> _Experimental in all editions of Grafana, for on-prem users only._

Author: @frossano-grafana - "All editions" should include Cloud. Is this only available in Enterprise and OSS?
```suggestion
_Experimental in all editions of Grafana, for on-prem users only._
```

Reviewer 5: yes, only enterprise and OSS, I can change that

Author: I'll fix it. Thanks for the clarification!

> This feature adds support for using JWT tokens to store rendering keys instead of relying on “remote caching”. It covers most of the rendering use cases, though some still rely on the remote cache as a store. You can enable this by enabling the feature flag `renderAuthJWT` in the `custom.ini` configuration file.

Author: ```suggestion
This feature adds support for using JWT tokens to store rendering keys instead of relying on “remote caching”. It covers most rendering use cases, though some still rely on the remote cache as a store. You can enable this by enabling the feature flag `renderAuthJWT` in the `custom.ini` configuration file.
```

> This feature adds support for using JWT tokens to store rendering keys instead of relying on “remote caching”. It covers most of the rendering use cases, though some still rely on the remote cache as a store. You can enable this by enabling the feature flag `renderAuthJWT` in the `custom.ini` configuration file. 

Author: ```suggestion
This feature adds support for using JWT tokens to store rendering keys instead of relying on “remote caching”. It covers most of the rendering use cases, though some still rely on the remote cache as a store. You can enable this by enabling the feature flag `renderAuthJWT` in the `custom.ini` configuration file.
```

> This feature adds support to use JWTs tokens to store rendering keys instead of relying on “remote caching”. It covers most of the rendering use cases, though some still relies on the remote cache as store. Users can enable it by enabling the feature flag `renderAuthJWT` in the custom.ini configuration. It allows to use JWT in rendering service instead of the main remote cache configured.

Author: ```suggestion
This feature adds support for using JWT tokens to store rendering keys instead of relying on “remote caching”. It covers most of the rendering use cases, though some still rely on the remote cache as a store. You can enable this by enabling the feature flag `renderAuthJWT` in the `custom.ini` configuration file. It allows you to use JWT in rendering service instead of the main remote cache configured.
```

> This feature adds support for using JWT tokens to store rendering keys instead of relying on “remote caching”. It covers most of the rendering use cases, though some still rely on the remote cache as a store. You can enable this by enabling the feature flag `renderAuthJWT` in the `custom.ini` configuration file. It allows you to use JWT in rendering service instead of the main remote cache configured.

Author: @frossano-grafana - is it okay for me to remove the last sentence? It seems like it's repetetive.

```suggestion
This feature adds support for using JWT tokens to store rendering keys instead of relying on “remote caching”. It covers most of the rendering use cases, though some still rely on the remote cache as a store. You can enable this by enabling the feature flag `renderAuthJWT` in the `custom.ini` configuration file. 
```

Reviewer 5: Yes

- Updated layouts featuring breadcrumbs and a sidebar, allowing users to quickly jump between pages.
- A new header that appears on all pages in Grafana, which includes a search function.

Join the [discussion on GitHub](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/discussions/58910) and share your feedback.

{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/navigation-9-4.png" max-width="750px" caption="Grafana new navigation" >}}

## Nested folders

_Available in experimental in all editions of Grafana._

You can now create nested folders in Grafana to help you better organize your dashboards and alerts. This new feature allows you to create, read, update, and delete nested folders, making it easier to sort resources by business units, departments, and teams.

You can also set up permissions using Role-Based Access Control (RBAC). Folder permissions will cascade, being inherited from the parent folder, which simplifies access management.

It's worth noting that the nested folders feature is currently experimental. As such, it's recommended to enable it only on test or development instances, rather than in production environments.

> To try out the nested folders feature, you'll need to enable the `nestedFolders` feature toggle. If you’re using Grafana Cloud, and would like to enable this feature, please contact customer support.

Reviewer 6: I'm hesitent to suggest people contact support for nested folders. i still think it's quite early and I don't want to create additional burden for cx

Reviewer 6: I think my concern is around how nested folders is still in an exceptionally early and rough state with a lot of caveats, and it's less about "asking for a feature flag enabled is a burden" but "once customers enable this flag, they may have a bunch more requests", especially because we don't support disabling the flag once enabled.

Reviewer 7: For experimental features, customers are told explicitly that we do not provide support, as captured in [this documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/release-life-cycle/) we recently published.

In subsequent releases, we’ll be refining and enhancing the user interface for managing dashboards and folders, to provide a more streamlined user experience.

## Dashboards and visualizations

### Redesigned empty dashboard state

> _Generally available in all editions of Grafana using the emptyDashboardPage [feature toggle]({{< relref "../setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#feature_toggles" >}}). The default value is `true` and you can disable it in config._

Reviewer 8: @imatwawana @polibb are we sure we want to mention the feature flag? This should be the default experience, when something is generally available we shouldn’t encourage people to disable it.

Author: I'll defer to @polibb on this, but IIRC, the point of the feature flag is mostly so that we have the option to roll back if needed. If that's still the case, then I agree, let's remove this.

Reviewer 8: Yep, that’s why we have feature flags. They allow us to revert and do phased rollouts, it’s not for the users to change the default experience of Grafana once it’s stable :)

> _Generally available in all editions of Grafana using the emptyDashboardPage [feature toggle](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#feature_toggles). The default value is `true` and you can disable it in config._
> 
> Dashboards have been updated so that it’s easier to begin building from an empty dashboard state. The options displayed when you add a new dashboard—adding a visualization, a row, or importing panels—each include brief explanations of what those steps will do, so you can begin building with confidence. 
> 
> Also, a text Add dropdown with these options has replaced the previous icon at the top of the dashboard. This makes it clearer that this element allows you to not just add new panels, but to take all the actions associated with building a new dashboard.

Author: ```suggestion
_Generally available in all editions of Grafana using the emptyDashboardPage [feature toggle]({{< relref "../setup-grafana/configure-grafana/#feature_toggles" >}}). The default value is `true` and you can disable it in config._

Dashboards have been updated so that it’s easier to begin building from an empty dashboard state. The options displayed when you add a new dashboard—adding a visualization, a row, or importing panels—each include brief explanations of what those steps will do, so you can begin building with confidence. 

Also, a text **Add** dropdown with these options has replaced the previous icon at the top of the dashboard. This makes it clearer that this element allows you to not just add new panels, but to take all the actions associated with building a new dashboard.
```

> {{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-empty-dashboard-whats-new-9-5.png" max-width="750px" caption="Admin view of data source connection page on dashboard creation" >}}

Author: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="/media/docs/grafana/screenshot-empty-dashboard-whats-new-9-5.png" max-width="750px" caption="Dashboard without any visualizations added" >}}
```
